How to install GDB by Noah Pendleton (#266)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/installing-gdb.md

2. the **target** architecture: where the program being debugged is run

Debugging a program that's running on the same machine as the host might look
like this:

[![img/installing-gdb/gdb_host_target.drawio.svg](/img/installing-gdb/gdb_host_target.drawio.svg)](/img/installing-gdb/gdb_host_target.drawio.svg)

In embedded engineering, we often want to target a foreign architecture (eg, the
embedded device, connected to some debug probe). That setup might look like
this:

[![img/installing-gdb/gdb_cross_target.drawio.svg](/img/installing-gdb/gdb_cross_target.drawio.svg)](/img/installing-gdb/gdb_cross_target.drawio.svg)

We need a version of GDB that supports the target architecture of the program
being debugged.

## Summary of Strategies

I'm going to go through the various ways to install GDB with ARM support, but
first here's a table summarizing the approaches:

| Strategy               | Binary or source install? | Pinned to version | Python support        |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------- | ----------------- | --------------------- |
| Build from source      | 📁source                  | ✅ yes            | ✅ (configurable)     |

> | Binaries from ARM      | 📦binary                  | ✅ yes            | ⚠️ varies per version |

Author: crosstool-ng also worth a mention

---

> title: "Tools we use: installing `gdb` for ARM"

Reviewer: I'd remove the backticks, since the formatting doesn't work for a title

description: Demonstrate a few methods of installing gdb for ARM
author: noah
image: img/<post-slug>/cover.png # 1200x630
---

<!-- excerpt start -->

In this mini article, I'll be going on a few strategies and nuances around
getting a copy of GDB installed for debugging ARM chips.

<!-- excerpt end -->

{% include newsletter.html %}

{% include toc.html %}

> ## GDB for ARM

Reviewer: I'd rename this section "Introduction"

GDB, the GNU Project Debugger, is by default typically compiled to target the
same architecture as the host system. When we talk about "host" and "target
architectures, what we mean is:

1. the **host** architecture: where the GDB program itself is run
2. the **target** architecture: where the program being debugged is run

Debugging a program that's running on the same machine as the host might look
like this:

[![img/installing-gdb/gdb_host_target.drawio.svg](/img/installing-gdb/gdb_host_target.drawio.svg)](/img/installing-gdb/gdb_host_target.drawio.svg)

In embedded engineering, we often want to target a foreign architecture (eg, the
embedded device, connected to some debug probe). That setup might look like
this:

[![img/installing-gdb/gdb_cross_target.drawio.svg](/img/installing-gdb/gdb_cross_target.drawio.svg)](/img/installing-gdb/gdb_cross_target.drawio.svg)

We need a version of GDB that supports the target architecture of the program
being debugged.

> 

Reviewer: I'd add a line introducing the article because the next transition is abrupt. Something like:

> In this article, we're interested in running GDB on an x86-64 or arm64 host and debugging an arm-v7m (32-bit) target. Getting the right toolchain setup can be tricky, especially if we want advanced features to be available. I'll go over different approaches people use to download and setup GDB and explain the pros and cons of each of them.

## Summary of strategies

I'm going to go through the various ways to install GDB with ARM support, but
first here's a table summarizing the approaches:

> | Strategy                   | Binary or source install? | Pinned to version | Python support        |

Reviewer: An additional column might be "requires a 3rd party package manager?" where Conda, Docker, ... are yes

| -------------------------- | ------------------------- | ----------------- | --------------------- |
| Build from source          | 📁source                  | ✅ yes            | ✅ (configurable)     |
| Binaries from ARM          | 📦binary                  | ✅ yes            | ⚠️ varies per version |
| System package manager     | 📦binary                  | ⚠️ varies         | ⚠️ varies             |
| Conda                      | 📦binary                  | ✅ yes            | ✅ yes                |
| Docker                     | 📦binary                  | ✅ yes            | ✅ yes                |
| SDK-specific tools         | 📦binary                  | ⚠️ varies         | ✅ (usually yes)      |
| xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC | 📦binary                  | ✅ yes            | ✅ yes                |
| crosstool-NG               | 📁source                  | ✅ yes            | ✅ (configurable)     |

## Details on each strategy

> ### Build from source

Reviewer: I might put this one second-to-last. "When all else fails, you can always build from source!". And have Crosstool-NG last as "an easier way to go about this is..."

Author: ooo good call :+1:

[Building a custom copy of GDB]({% post_url 2020-04-08-gnu-binutils %}) is one
way to enable support for the necessary architecture.

You might for example build GDB enabling all targets:

```bash
❯ ./configure
  --target="arm-elf-linux"
  --enable-targets=all
  --with-python
❯ make -j $(nproc)
```

This results in a nicely tuned copy of GDB- you can select only the features
needed, enable different optimizations, select the correct Python version to
integrate, etc., and are in full control of your software supply chain!

> The downside for from-source builds (in general):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The downsides of from-source builds (in general):
```

- can be challenging to build for Windows or other non-Unix platforms
- need to maintain build tooling + binary repositories
- using custom builds, you might encounter edge cases or warts that have been
  solved in more widely used copies of the same software

> Quick note- if you want to see which architectures a given `gdb` binary
> supports, here's a shell "one-liner" that can be useful (taken from
> [here](https://sourceware.org/git/?p=binutils-gdb.git;a=blob;f=gdb/gdb_buildall.sh;hb=4a94e36819485cdbd50438f800d1e478156a4889#l206)):
>
> ```bash
> gdb --batch -nx --ex 'set architecture' 2>&1 | \
>   tail -n 1 | \
>   sed 's/auto./\n/g' | \
>   sed 's/,/\n/g' | \
>   sed 's/Requires an argument. Valid arguments are/\n/g' | \

> >   sed '/^[ ]*$/d' | sort | uniq

Reviewer 2: I don't have a better one line for you but note this only works on linux -- OG sed doesn't support emitting \n :/

Author: Urk 😂 always gets me! I'll make a note

> ```

### Binaries from ARM

> ARM ships full prebuilt GCC + Binutils toolchains for Linux, Windows, and Mac.

Reviewer: Worth managing that this is the only option that's officially supported by ARM

These were originally hosted on launchpad.net, but were moved here around 2016:

<https://developer.arm.com/downloads/-/gnu-rm>

In 2022, the downloads relocated again to this page:

<https://developer.arm.com/tools-and-software/open-source-software/developer-tools/gnu-toolchain/downloads>

These packages are very handy- they include the following components:

- GCC compiler
- all binutils
  - GDB
  - LD
  - objdump, etc
- prebuilt Newlib C library
- prebuilt "Newlib-Nano" reduced size C library
- various example linker scripts and startup files

Another benefit- you can have developers on Windows/Linux/Mac all using the same
version of the compiler (doesn't necessarily guarantee bit-for-bit reproducible
builds, but chances are pretty good).

The same tools can also easily be used in whatever CI system you are using.

There is one gotcha with these packages, though- the python support is whatever
was configured at build time by ARM. This means if you're using [GDB's python
API]({% post_url 2019-07-02-automate-debugging-with-gdb-python-api %}), you'll
need to make sure your python scripts/dependencies/interpreter matches the
interpreter embedded into GDB.

> And in the latest release, python support was dropped in the Mac release:

Reviewer 3: Capitalize Python

may have one of:

- `apt-get` / `apt` (Debian, Ubuntu)
- `pacman` (Arch)
- `yum` (Red Hat)

Mac users will often install [homebrew](https://brew.sh/), since there is no
built-in package manager.

Windows users may use something like [chocolately](https://chocolatey.org/) or
the recent
[winget](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/) tool.

It's certainly convenient to be able to do something as simple as this to
acquire a version of `gdb` compatible with arm targets:

```bash
❯ sudo apt install gdb-multiarch
```

On Linux, those `gdb-multiarch` packages usually have a _lot_ of supported
targets. On my Ubuntu 22.04 machine, it's **214** supported targets!

```bash
# using the one liner from above to list supported targets
❯ gdb-multiarch --batch -nx --ex 'set architecture' 2>&1 | tail -n 1 | sed 's/auto./\n/g' | sed 's/,/\n/g' | sed 's/Requires an argument. Valid arguments are/\n/g' | sed '/^[ ]*$/d' | sort | uniq | wc -l

214
```

Of course, it's only important that the targets we're interested in are
supported.

There are a few downsides to using a package manager to install the tools:

> - at the mercy of the available packages (or you need to create and maintain a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- you are at the mercy of the available packages (or you need to create and maintain a
```

- <https://docs.memfault.com/docs/mcu/coredump-elf-with-gdb/#multi-architecture-gdb-using-docker>

### SDK-specific tools

SDK Vendors (and IDE vendors too!) will often package copies of GDB, along with
other toolchain components, to make it easy to get started with their platform.

For example, Zephyr RTOS provides pre-built toolchains, that include the
appropriate GDB versions:

- <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/sdk-ng/releases/tag/v0.14.2>

ESP-IDF from Espressif provides similar tool packages:

- <https://github.com/espressif/binutils-gdb/releases/esp-gdb-v11.2_20220715>

Advantages:

- these packages are often well-tested by the vendors, and you may even be able
  to get support if you encounter issues!
- generally support all Linux/Mac/Windows these days

Disadvantages:

- often these packages are very tailored to the particular environment (which
  usually is just fine), including custom patches for example
- python support can be pretty variable- some packages won't have python support
  at all, or it will only be for a specific version.
- external dependencies may not be provided (eg libpython), and you'll have to
  bring your own

> 

Reviewer 2: They often wind up being SUPER OLD -- so you wind up picking up compiler bugs and missing out on optimizations for codespace/speed

Author: ooo yeah, good point! will call it out

### xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC

The [xPack Project](https://xpack.github.io/) provides a prebuilt gcc-arm
toolchain:

- <https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/releases/>

They tend to be pretty up-to-date, and more reliably include python support.

There's also build documentation, if you'd like to tweak the package:

- <https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/blob/xpack/README-BUILD.md>

> Overall pretty simple and easy to use, and could be a good alternative to the

Reviewer: This looks like the best option? May be worth highlighting stronger pros/cons. Currently it reads as "this is another option we haven't dug into much".

Author: Yeah, good call! I'll move it under the arm one as a very viable alternative.
